the sun rises above the mountains
at either end of the narrow twisting
valley two armies slowly advance towards
one another
and to war as strategic adviser to
general reddington
leader of the red army you have been
charged with planning this attack
it falls to you to predict whether or
not the red arm can successfully defeat
general bluford and its blue invaders
or if it would be better to fall back
and live to fight another day
you look down the valley and you can see
that the enemy outnumber your own troops
two to one however you also know that
your red soldiers are much better
trained than their blues
so the question is could we use maths to
predict the outcome of the battle and
help us decide what to do
mathematical models are useful tools for
analyzing real-world situations
they help us to simplify complex
processes and allow us to calculate the
potential outcomes
the first step in applying a good
mathematical model to any system
is to understand the basic processes
that make our system tick
in this case the overall system is the
battle and the underlying interaction
is the combat between individual
soldiers
for the sake of simplicity let's assume
that each soldier on the front line only
fights with the opposite soldier on the
other side
when one is victorious the loser is
instantly replaced by another soldier
from that army
this gives us a static front line
between the armies stretching from one
side of the valley to the other
this means that the soldiers further
back from the front don't actually do
any fighting until they reach the line
this may seem like a small detail but it
becomes very important later on
let's introduce two new parameters alpha
and beta
to account for how well trained and well
armed each army is
alpha represents how effective each red
soldier is at defeating the enemy
where a value of one means each red
soldier on the line defeats one blue
soldier per unit of time
and a value of zero means that the red
soldiers are utterly worthless and don't
achieve anything
ever similarly beta represents the same
thing but for the blue soldiers
in reality these parameters would
probably depend on other factors
since soldiers get tired as the battle
goes on the parameters would have some
dependence on time
and if we factor in the morale of the
soldiers it would probably also depend
on both the size of their army and the
enemies army too
however to keep things simple we'll for
now assume that they are constant
this will be one of the main simplifying
assumptions for our model
we can now use these constants to
construct a differential equation that
describes how the size of each army
changes with time
we use a for the number of red soldiers
and b for the number of blue soldiers at
some time
t the rate of change of our army is
written as d a by dt
but what is that equal to well the
number of our soldiers lost per unit
time
must be equal to the number of enemy
soldiers attacking our army at once
multiplied by the effectiveness of those
soldiers which is just the number of
reds that each blue defeats per unit
time which of course is just beta
therefore we can write d a by dt as
minus b to times n
where n is the number of blue soldiers
on the front line and the minus sign
comes from the fact that we are losing
troops not gaining them
for the blue army we get a very similar
equation just in terms of alpha
since both armies have the same number
of soldiers on the line at once n is the
same in both equations
the important thing to notice here is
that both armies are shrinking at a
constant rate
this is called lanchester's linear law
as when we plot the size of each army
over time on a graph the resulting trend
is just a straight line
the gradient of this line is
proportional to the effectiveness of the
enemy soldiers
and the point where each line crosses
the y-axis is just the initial size of
each army
now assuming both armies are willing to
fight to the bitter end
the losing side will be the army who
gets wiped out first so their line will
be the first to reach zero
we know that the blue army is initially
twice the size of the red army
so in order to be victorious the red
soldiers must be more than twice as
effective as the blue soldiers
as this will mean the blue line drops to
zero before the red line does
alternatively we can reach this same
result algebraically
let's start by dividing the previous two
equations by each other to get this new
equation
which is just in terms of a and b by
integrating this combined equation we
end up with this one here
where a naught and b naught are the
initial size of each army
if you haven't come across integration
before then don't worry about it the
important thing is we get this equation
here
since we want to know what it will take
for us to win the battle we are looking
for the conditions under which
a is positive when b is zero that is we
want let's be red's left over after all
the blues have been eliminated
by rearranging our equation we can see
that for this to be the case
alpha times a naught must be larger than
beta times b naught
let's call this quantity of
effectiveness multiplied by size the
fighting force of an army
put simply the army with the greatest
fighting force will win the battle
now all we need to do is compare the
fighting force of your red troops to the
enemy blue troops to see who will emerge
victorious
since the enemy has twice as many units
as us our red soldiers must be at least
twice as effective as their blue
soldiers in order to have an equal
fighting force
this is what we found earlier when we
looked at the graph of how army size
evolves through time
luckily for you it's a well-known fact
throughout the land that a single red
soldier is more than a match for at
least three blues
so we can predict that you are headed
for a hard fought but ultimately
victorious battle
now i'm sure you're probably thinking
that this answer is pretty obvious
if there are two blue soldiers for each
red but each red soldier is worth three
blues
then clearly the red army will win if we
know that from basic intuition
doesn't that make all of this mass kind
of unnecessary
well no lanchester's linear law is very
intuitive
however it only applies to simple
scenarios such as ours
where the number of soldiers fighting at
once is fixed as the limited front line
prevents the blue army from surrounding
and overwhelming the reds
when this is not the case we get a far
more surprising and less obvious result
to understand the impact that this
simple constraint has on the outcome of
a battle
let's look at the math behind a
different scenario where there are no
limitations on how each arm we can
attack
and examine those results few short
months after your victory in the valley
a band of 1 000 red archers are crossing
a large flat desert
through the shimmering haze they spot a
column of blue arches heading in their
direction
as they get closer the red general
estimates their numbers to be about two
thousand
once again they outnumber the reds two
to one however
the superior lightweight bows of the red
army allow them to fire arrows three
times the rate of the blue arches
once again making red arches three times
as effective as their opponents
the red general thinks back to how his
army emerged victorious under these same
conditions back in the valley
so he orders his troops to advance and
engage the enemy
despite his expectations of a sure
victory the general and his entire
battle
group are completely wiped out but how
could this happen
surely the effectiveness of the red
soldiers easily makes up for the
disadvantage in numbers
let's construct a mathematical model of
the battle and see if we can figure out
what went wrong
the key difference to notice between
this scenario and the earlier one in the
valley is the type of combat that is
occurring
in the valley only those at the front
line of the battle were able to fight
the rest had to wait their turn however
in the desert battle there is no terrain
to restrict
the combat and the archer's ability to
attack at range means that at any one
moment in time
every soldier is in a position to attack
the enemy and also to be attacked
there are no soldiers sitting around
waiting their turn this time
it's all the reds versus all the blues
let's form some equations
similar to the previous ones that
describe how the size of each army
changes with time
just as in the valley case the rate at
which each army decreases will be equal
to the number of enemy soldiers
attacking it at once
multiplied by the effectiveness of those
attackers the only difference between
these equations and the previous ones
is that the number of attackers is no
longer constant
there is no longer a front line the
number of attackers is just the total
number of enemy soldiers
this means that the size of each army
does not follow a linear trend over time
it can't be plotted on a graph as a
straight line as the gradient is no
longer constant
if we once again combine these equations
and integrate the result we end up with
this equation here
where again a naught and b naught are
the initial size of each army
as you can see it is the square of the
number of soldiers in each army that is
proportional this time
this is lanchester's square law again
let's look at what conditions need to be
fulfilled for a red victory
for this to happen we need a to be
positive when b is zero
when we plug these constraints into our
equation we end up with this inequality
here
so for the red army to win alpha times a
naught squared must be larger than b to
times b naught squared
let's think of this alpha a naught
squared term as the new fighting force
of an army
since the model predicts that whichever
side has the highest value will win the
battle
this is almost identical to the fighting
force we defined in the linear case
except now it's in terms of the square
of the army size this fact is incredibly
important as it means that having a
larger number of soldiers gives you a
far greater chance of winning
for example if we doubled the size of an
army their fighting force would become
four times greater
as the factor of two is squared this is
why the red arch has lost the battle in
the desert
as the numbers advantage held by the
blues squared
was more than the effectiveness
advantage held by the reds
just to demonstrate the power of the
square law further let's look at what
would happen if two sides were identical
in effectiveness but one had a slight
numbers advantage
here purple has 1 000 units against
green 700.
intuitively we might assume that since
the numbers are quite close purple would
win but lose most of their troops in the
process
however thanks to the square law purple
actually wins the battle with 714
soldiers remaining
a very large proportion of their
original army
but why is this how does such a small
numbers advantage have such a massive
impact on who wins the battle
well at the fundamental level it's
because the attacking strength of an
army is directly proportional to its
size
i think the best way to understand this
is by considering the size gap between
the armies and looking at how it changes
with time
at the start of an engagement the larger
force deals a large amount of damage to
the smaller force
while the smaller force deals a smaller
amount of damage back this is because as
we pointed out earlier attack strength
is proportional to size
this means that the smaller force will
lose more men than the larger force does
increasing the size difference this
process repeats itself over and over
again
with the size difference and by
extension the strength difference
getting larger and larger
until a smaller force is completely
wiped out
as the smaller force shrinks its ability
to damage the larger force back also
shrinks
making the power imbalance even more
pronounced
this effect compounds over time with a
small size difference
at the start leading to a much larger
size difference later on
this is what we saw earlier with the
purple army completely decimating the
green without many casualties
this is all a result of the simple fact
that every soldier was able to engage
the enemy at once
english engineer friedrich lanchester
came up with these equations in 1916
during world war one
where the use of ranged aimed weapons
made this sort of combat a lot more
common
but whether or not they were useful is a
different story after all
isn't this all very idealized can we
really apply these results to real life
situations
well there isn't really a
straightforward answer to these
questions
real life is after all incredibly
complicated with countless variables and
uncertainties
the lanchester model of combat is
ultimately very simple as it rests on
several big assumptions
some of the most glaring of these
include taking alpha and beta to be
constant
assuming all the soldiers are the same
and not taking into account strategic
deployment
tactical advantages and the effects of
terrain such as high ground and cover
as well as many more now whether or not
these assumptions are suitable at
providing a good approximation of what's
actually going on
depends on the situation for example
there are some cases where it would be
completely fine to assume that all of
your troops are functionally identical
and in other cases that would be a
really bad assumption to make say if you
had a mixture of cavalry and infantry in
the same army
it would be virtually impossible to
predict everything that happens in a
real-life battle
the inherent randomness and increasing
chaos would be far too complex to
account for
however these general mathematical
models can provide a rough approximate
idea of what is likely to happen
the more detailed and accurate we make
it and the less assumptions we make the
more reliable the result will be
they also help us to get a much better
understanding of the general principles
involved
which is an incredibly valuable tool
after all if the red general had known
about manchester square law back in the
desert
then perhaps he wouldn't have been so
eager to engage in combat and both he
and his soldiers would have lived to
fight another day
i've been dan hunt thanks very much for
watching
you